i'm brittany muller maza senior SEO
scientist and you're watching a hundred
days of SEO what's up y'all Brendon
huffard here rocking the shades and the
tank top because it's summer I got my
kids playground in the background I'm
really feeling myself today so I'm
excited I'm so happy today I get to
share with you an interview I did with
Brittany Muller she's the senior SEO
scientist at Maas one of the smartest
SEO people I know without further ado
let's check that out nailed the whistle
that time I never nail it I always
nailed it that happens no didn't just
just watch the interview hey thanks for
joining us for 100 days of SEO thank you
so much for having me this was awesome
yeah absolutely I'm super excited I'm
very jealous of your microphone and your
professional studio but I'll get over it
I kind of want to dive in right and I
guess what I want to start is you've
been doing SEO for long enough that
you've seen trends come and go and
things get hot for a little bit and then
they're not cool anymore people say do
this or don't do that and it just seems
to be so much opinion so I wanted to get
your take like where do you start when
it comes to SEO whether it's looking at
a new project or just like as far as
thinking about a framework of like being
successful somebody's watching this and
they either like just want to get more
traffic from search or they're starting
a brand new project and like I want SEO
to be part of how I market this like
where should they start yeah that's a
good question and I think a lot of
people struggle with this but if you can
consistently come back to this idea that
you have to have a solid understanding
of your client or the website or the
product or the target market in order to
even get going you begin to devise your
own strategy right so a lot of times I
have this perception of being our SEO s
that don't really know what questions to
ask to get to the root of a client
understanding 101 if your
able to have those conversations and if
you're able to understand what metrics
people care about and what that end goal
looks like then you can kind of work
backwards so I think it really comes
down to asking the right questions and
figuring out what those primary kpi's
look like for you and for the specific
project what if they're not doing like
client what if they have their own like
maybe they're just a blogger or
something maybe I want to sell some
ebooks or something based on my
expertise about growing succulents in my
window garden or something like what you
know what are some things they can start
to think about like as far as their user
since they may not have clients per se
but like their user who ever seen if
this is the website how would they how
would you start thinking about that yeah
so I would again consider what that end
goal is and like say if it's an action
like buying an e-book is that the route
you want people to take the second they
get to your site you know like what is
that initial action and are there ways
in which you can funnel that action
maybe they're not ready to buy an e-book
maybe they're just curious about
succulents so have questions about the
type of soil like are you creating the
information around that right and sort
of help lead people through that funnel
at different aspects of the acquisition
and that's where again really knowing
your consumers knowing how people are
searching for that product or for that
thing online starts to paint a picture
so if you get so dialed in you're just
focused on one keyword you sort of miss
the rest of the movie right like it's
just a snapshot so really trying to wrap
your head around what that acquisition
looks like and fulfilling each step
mm-hmm yeah once once I kind of have
that nailed down what are some other
like beginner SEO mistakes that you see
pretty often I know that especially
working at Moz you have some really good
resources for
or beginners and other resources right
for more advanced SEO strategies and
things like that but I know that the Moz
beginners guide has been this thing that
has existed for quite a while and is
that helpful for a lot of people do you
know this such a random question do you
have any idea how many like total people
have looked at that I know it's gone
through iterations but like how many
total people have even looked at that
over 10 million that's outstanding hey
now I know it's so wild it's really well
it seems like if you have this really
good handle on mistakes beginners make
like what are other mistakes you see
beginners making when it comes to SEO
yeah that's such a good question so I
think at a really fundamental level it's
everything from you know not having a
sitemap ignoring like your robots.txt
and not even having your domain
configured properly so a lot of you in
our SEO aren't even checking for the
HTTP versus HTTPS versions or the dub
dub dub versus non dub dub right is that
all redirecting to the same URL or do
you have duplicate versions of the site
when you start with a website you should
start your work based on how Google is
going to crawl right the accessibility
of it so what is the navigational
structure look like is it beneficial to
both search engines and users does it
make sense is it you know is it easy to
follow it's sort of that you know don't
make me think mentality right and it
should be really intuitive to use and
then following the short URL structures
that make sense those are all kind of
like beginner 100 ones that we see
flubbed pretty frequently yeah it makes
me want to go check my own website right
yeah but I think yeah I totally agree
with you I think this is something
that's funny it keeps coming up again
and again in having conversations with
people who really know SEO like yourself
is that it people get into it without a
basic understanding of how the internet
works and how a website is yeah
it's content and it's links and I know
those things but they don't understand
like what a server is or what and I'm
not saying you have to be like have it
developer background or anything like
that but if you don't know that there's
like physical copies of your website
that gets served to people and
physically the closer it is to them the
faster it is like it actually matters
yeah like people just don't have that
basic understanding and I'll be honest
like I kind of had an understanding of
things but then doing this hundred days
of SEO project I've started to do a lot
of research around it cuz I wanted you
know Nick Eubanks was one of the first
people to point it out to me and I'm
like oh yeah people really people should
really know that so I figured it out and
it's really I can be honest like it's
really not that hard to figure out but
yeah like you said like people don't
know what a robot's file is and it
sounds intimidating but these are really
like a 90 second YouTube video away from
you understand it makes all the
difference between you being available
in search and you not being available in
search right so it makes a huge
difference
you could be doing all the SEO in the
world but if you don't have that
configured properly or if you're
disallowing Googlebot from even crawling
your site no one's gonna find you right
so that's why it's always step one in my
brain and I try to instill and into
others is really to take that first
initial step yeah I was looking at
somebody's website the other day and we
found that like their whole blog for
some reason their robots file somebody
deleted part of it and it was supposed
to disallow like the best admin and it
just said disallow with like the slash
which means the whole website yeah and
just it was quickly in real sort order
like why are all my keywords going away
like I just looked and we're down like
90 percent from last month and it's just
like ah geez yeah but I mean luckily it
wasn't anybody's website that I was
working on but it is still like pretty
wild but they would they didn't even
know to check that robots file could be
a thing an issue what about I wouldn't
you know we always talk about like
mistakes and like beginner mistakes and
six-four what I think you have some
really interesting thoughts around like
opportunities for people that are more
advanced in SEO like they have the
basics they know how the internet works
they have figured out content in links
and and really what Google wants to see
and it's kind of sussing out like search
intent and everything some of the
opportunities that you're seeing now for
like more advanced SEO is to really take
advantage of like new technology and
things yeah so there's a couple really
exciting ones one being this sort of I
don't want to say if it's a newer idea
it's just been talked about more
recently in this last year of the idea
of Google crawling and indexing your
site let's say you have a really large
site those index pages affect the
perceived quality of your site right so
there's this kind of fresh idea of if
you prune your site and if you prune old
content if you delete it redirect it it
can give you a boost in the in this the
Google's perception right of your site
quality which is really interesting a
lot of sites have seen boosts from this
and it makes sense not only from a
search perspective but from a user
perspective as well you don't want old
outdated content affecting your traffic
or people that are coming searching for
things on your site another one is not
optimizing for internal linking so if if
you think about it and you think about
the structure of the web you know you
often think of these things like trees
right or that your homepage has all of
these links from all the other pages on
your site it's very similar it's very
similar for Google to take a look at
what are the important pages on your
site and how many internal links do you
have directing people right directing
your traffic to these pages that we
should consider more you know
authoritative per se so there has been
lots of really interesting studies
happening
around optimizing for that internal
linking structure and seeing that work
really really well so that's that's
super exciting on my lights just enough
it's like the easiest way to do link
building right you're not asking someone
for a link you have all this content in
your site and now you're just optimizing
the flow of traffic and BOTS to your
most important pages another one I have
here is ignoring log files I think is a
super common advanced mistake and I
don't know I'm a huge fan of log file
analysis because it essentially it's
literally black and white it shows you
what Googlebot is doing on your site and
it's fascinating the stuff you can get
from it and I it just starts to paint a
picture of what are the common URLs it
crawls you know what are the common URLs
that are returning four oh four five
hundreds you name it how can you better
optimize for that crawl budget because
you only see Googlebot crawling a
certain number of times per day it might
as well be on your really high quality
content right and not these silly you
know broken JavaScript links that you
have throughout your page stuff like
that and then you know the biggest
opportunity that I think was touched on
briefly at a traffic think tank a little
bit in the Q&A stuff is you know just
nurturing relationships better and I
think this goes for whether you work
with clients or you're doing your own
thing I think there's still so much
opportunity to to just connect with
people a little bit better and more
often or have a process around that so
you're not dropping the ball on things I
think we don't talk about that enough as
an industry and it's so applicable to
what we do right like that goes right
back to like link building or sales you
name it like I think there could be a
lot more discussed there and opportunity
is available yeah
Island those are all really good points
I think what's interesting I've seen a
lot of people they want to do like
content audits and they have like 75
articles on their website and it's like
yeah I it's fine do it but like you're
probably better off spending a lot
there's probably some new stuff you
could write you know and I mean like I'm
logging for five they met a website for
five years they have 75 articles that's
not bad that's great but you know you
could have 250 if you're doing it once a
week and doing it really well so I think
like I remember you I don't a misquote
anything but I feel like you like Moz
pruned a bunch of like forums stuff that
hadn't gotten traffic in a long time and
it was a lot like it was thousands or
maybe something is that accurate yeah
was around like 70% of the site yeah but
yeah we have a huge website like it's
not like you have like 400 like its
massive right great yeah it was a lot so
things like that can be super helpful I
just want to like steer people away from
wasting two or three weeks on a Content
audit when it's like you have 25 blog
posts like it's probably time to just
keep keep working I don't know I don't
know if I'm 100% on the same page just
because I see cases of people with 8
blog posts in the last two years do
extremely well because it's really rich
focused high quality stuff and they're
busy promoting it so I think I think it
really depends I would I always suggest
you know quality over quantity
I think that's you know what naturally
builds links that's what naturally
builds you credibility in search engines
but I think it really depends on the
topic in the industry do you feel like
that's for sure I have a website on
photo MBA like a lot of my early SEO
clients were photographers and I was
like they're all bad at business like I
need to teach you on my business so
photo MBA was born
and it's one of those URLs that sounds
really smart like oh it's like an MBA
and photographer get it so witty but you
write it out and it looks like fatone
be' and it's like poor decisions anyways
I mail this good content like did all of
the right stuff and traffic was going up
up up and I started to experiment at the
end of 2018 I was like side put 2018 and
a lot of my titles and a lot of the
stuff was like really timely I never
updated published dates I never updated
the articles and I was like I wonder
what happens in search if I leave them
like if I leave the title saying 2018 if
I never update them and I just watched
like their rankings just go down down
down traffic is down every single month
traffic's down and it's fine it's but I
want to see now I went in yesterday put
in a bunch of updates articles update
the publish date to like yesterday for
all of them updated the titles to say
they're updated for 2019 and I want to
see if things come back yeah and I think
like a lot of people are willing to do
things like that not that everybody is
it's a very fortunate situation where
I'm not relying on that website to like
make any serious money but like a lot of
people daren't in the situation to run
an experiment like that but I think we
should like you need to be they just be
reading blog posts about other people's
experiments like try it I don't I mean I
have a pretty strong theory that it'll
come back and it'll do really well
without any more links or anything like
that just by Google's seem like oh this
is better and it's more recent its
updated and then people clicking on it
more cuz it's updated new and I agree to
you also mention relationship building
and I just want to like make a note of
that too I think a lot of people like we
think about like getting links or
whatever else we don't realize that like
it's a human like you're emailing it
another person who has goals and like
things that they're into there's a lady
behind me waving our hands
totally thing sorry I'm like distracted
by my own camera i pointed
like you know we forget that like
building these relationships matter so a
lot of people think like get a link from
certain example as this in this link
building like you want one link from
each website after that there was like
some diminishing returns
I think Google's gonna figure out in
pretty short order that like that
shouldn't be the case like if I can get
like for example if Moz linked to me
today and you and I stay in touch we
have a great relationship and like all
of this stuff and and like a good long
friendship for five years and over the
course of five years I linked to Mozilla
and you link to me a lot but that's more
powerful because it shows like this
really great pattern of linking back and
forth over time versus just like oh you
got that one Moz link in 2013 and then
they never linked to you again why like
something must be wrong and I think I
think because that's a really easy human
thing to figure out you know like your
friend hits you up on Facebook and you
haven't talked to them since like high
school totally it's weird right
it's weird I feel like I don't know
maybe I'm applying human so I know but I
think that's the smartest way to
evaluate this kind of stuff is you have
to apply human tendencies you know it's
like third-party credibility in real
life that's what like link building and
that's what links are to the Internet so
I think that's that's a really really
interesting point I love that nice well
cool Britney I really appreciate your
time thanks for coming on hundred days
of SEO thanks for having me this was
awesome keep up it's tough
[Music]